.. _s3:

Mounting S3 Buckets in Renku Sessions
=====================================

Renku has an optional feature that allows users to mount and access data in
any S3-compatible object storage. This feature is enabled at `renkulab.io <http://renkulab.io>`_ 
but please note that on other Renku deployment this may not be the case.
If your deployment does not have this feature enabled you should contact
your administrator.

Amazon AWS initially came up with the S3 API for object storage. However, nowadays
almost all cloud providers have S3-compatible object storage. For example, Google Cloud Storage
is S3 compatible and can be used in Renku. Please refer to your cloud provider documentation
for more details.

Step-by-step Instructions 
-------------------------

There are many public datasets that are hosted by AWS or other cloud providers on
S3-compatible object storage. One such dataset is the `Genome in a Bottle (GIAB) <https://registry.opendata.aws/giab/>`_ 
dataset hosted on AWS. If you wish to use the GIAB data in a Renku session follow these steps:

1. Navigate to the ``Sessions`` tab in your Renku project.
2. Click the green ``New Session`` button on the right side of the page.
3. Click on the ``Do you want to select the branch, commit, image or configure cloud storage`` link.
4. Click on the ``Configure Cloud Storage`` button in the section that was revealed in the previous step.
5. In the form that opened, enter the ``Endpoint`` for the GIAB bucket as ``http://s3.amazonaws.com``.
6. The only other field you have to fill in is the ``Bucket Name`` field. For the GIAB bucket this is simply ``giab``. The ``Access Key`` and ``Secret Key`` fields can be left empty because this is a public bucket.
7. Click ``Save``.
8. Click ``Start session``.
9. Once you session is ready the bucket will be available inside your session at ``/cloudstorage/<bucket name>``. In this case for the GIAB bucket it will be available at ``/cloudstorage/giab``.

Limitations
-----------

There are a few limitations of this feature that users should be aware of. Please note that as we 
further develop this feature some of these limitations will be relaxed or fully lifted.

* **Accessing data in mounted buckets is 3x to 10x slower than accessing data on disk.** 
  All content that is available in the bucket is fetched over the internet every time you need to 
  access it. Therefore, using this feature will be slower compared to when data is downloaded to disk. 
  However, the benefit is that mounting a bucket does not require any additional disk space. 
  So you could mount a bucket which has 1TB of data in your session and you would not need to request 1TB of 
  storage from Renku. We are investigating methods to provide caching or other means to improve the performance.
* **All mounted buckets have to have unique names.** There is no limit to how many buckets can be 
  mounted in a session but  because all buckets are mounted in the same folder (i.e. ``/cloudstorage``)
  if you try to mount two buckets with the same name then one mount would overwrite the other. 
  However, Renku will not let you get to this point and will prevent you from launching a session if 
  there are duplicate bucket names (regardless of the endpoint) across all the buckets you are trying
  to mount.
* **Buckets can only be mounted in `read-only` mode** regardless of whether your credentials 
  (if provided) allow you to read and write in the bucket you are mounting. This is just a precaution 
  that may eventually be removed as the feature is further developed.
